okay this is the last topic for SACE
stage 2 methods it's called sampling and
confidence
intervals and as we do more and more of
this topic you'll see that it's
basically a combination of the last two
topics we did which are discrete random
variables and continuous random
variables we can divide this topic up
into two parts which I want you to keep
in mind as we go through this series of
videos the first part is called sample
means and the second part is called
sample proportions in this video we're
going to go through an introduction to
sampling and specifically sample means
so first let's talk about what sampling
actually is let's say that we wanted to
find the average height of every human
being in the world practically this
would be impossible because we'd have to
measure every single person right so
instead what we can do is we can take a
smaller sample of the world population
let's say of 100 people and we could
average the height of this sample of 100
and use that sample mean to average the
true population mean height so that's
what sampling is used for we take a
sample which is meant to be
representative of the whole population
when we take a sample of a population
there are two types of variables that we
can
analyze sample means and Sample
proportions a sample mean is the average
data value of a population so for
example the average height or the
average duration of a song a sample
proportion is the percentage of data
values which fall into a particular
category so for example the percentage
of people who are above 6t tall or the
percentage of songs which are between 2
and 3 minutes long so because of this
notice that sample proportions always
have to take a value between 0 and 1
where zero means none of the population
falls into that category and one means
100% of the population falls into that
category on the other hand sample means
can take any value because they just
represent the average data value of a
population keep this table in mind as we
work through the next few videos the
first few will'll be talking about
sample means and then we'll go on to
sample proportions let's talk about
sample means first the sample mean is
just the mean of a sample right so to
talk about sample means we have to
Define form formulas on how to calculate
the sample mean and actually these
formulas are things we've already
learned about in statistics in Middle
School let's say we had a sample of
three people and their heights were 160
170 and 180 cm well how would we
calculate the mean of this sample we
would just add these three Heights
together and divide by three because
three is the sample size right so when
we're talking about sample means the
first thing that we do is Define the
sample sum we write this down as SN
where n is the sample size so in this
example that I did over here this would
be S3 adding up the three Heights SN is
the sample sum or just the sum of all of
the things in the sample so the formula
for this is we just add them up we can
denote this with X1 + X2 plus all the
way to xn again this just means means we
add the things in the sample like this
once we add the things in the sample up
to find the sample mean we have to
divide by the sample size so the sample
mean we write as xar n and this is found
by dividing SN by n hopefully that makes
sense look at this formula here we have
the sample sum on top which is the sum
of the three Heights and then we divide
by three because that's how many people
we have in our sample so we could also
write this as X1 + X2 all the way to xn/
n let's talk about the properties of SN
and xrn SN and xrn are actually random
variables themselves the reason for this
is because we could take lots of
different samples and every time we
would have a slightly different sample
sum and Sample mean for example this is
my sample of three people
but I could then go and Sample a
different set of five people and measure
their heights as 171 172 and 173 we
divide by three to find the sample mean
so we could see that these two represent
different samples from the same
population we just happen to pick
different people they also have slightly
different sample means this sample mean
is 170 whereas this sample mean is 172
so if we kept doing this and took lots
and lots of samples of three people each
of these samples would have a slightly
different sample mean and therefore both
the sample mean and the sample sum are
continuous random variables meaning that
they each have a mean and a standard
deviation which depend on the true
population mean so if we say that mu is
the true population mean and and sigma
is the true population standard
deviation then there are formulas we can
use to calculate the mean and the
standard deviation of these two random
variables the mean of the sample sum is
written as Mu SN and this is found by
multiplying n by the true population
mean this should make sense because
let's say that the true population mean
height was 170 cm so that would be this
value here right well if we kept taking
samples of three people we would expect
that those samples would have a sample
sum which is approximately 3 * 170 n *
mu the standard deviation of the sample
sum is written as Sigma SN and this is
equal to the standard deviation of the
population multiplied by the square root
of n the reason why there's a square
root here and it's it's not just n Sigma
is because the variance if you recall is
the square of the standard deviation so
the variance would be n * the variance
of the population and then when we
square root it to get the standard
deviation that's where this square root
comes from okay the mean of the sample
mean is written as Mu xn and this is
just equal to the population mean so to
give a real life interpretation
if the true average height was 170 cm if
we took lots and lots of samples of
three people and averaged the height of
each of those samples we would expect
most of those averages to be about 170
the standard deviation of xar n is equal
to the standard deviation of the
population /un n the reason why it's
like this is because record that the
sample mean is found by dividing SN by n
so if we took this standard deviation
here which is Sigma root n that's the
standard deviation of the sample sum and
we divided it by n to get the sample
mean like we do here then simplifying
this gives us Sigma over root n if
you're confused at this one just
remember your index laws for these n
values I know this may seem a little bit
confusing
but I promise the questions aren't that
bad to explain it better let me try and
use another example so let's say that X
represents the average weight of a can
of Coke produced by a factory where X is
normally distributed with mean 250 g and
standard deviation 2 G if we took a
sample of 10 cans this sample now has
two properties it has its sample sum S10
and its sample mean xar 10 now in this
case the sample sum S10 is found by
adding up the weights of the cans right
so S10 actually represents the total
weight of 10 cans remember that the key
word for sample sum is total the sample
mean xar 10 represents the average
weight of a can in a sample of 10 so
that's the key word for sample mean
average S10 and X10 both have their own
distribution they're normally
distributed but don't worry about why
we'll talk about that later for now we
just need to be able to use these
formulas to find the mean and standard
deviation of the sample sum and the
sample mean so for S10 which is the
total weight of 10 cans that would just
be 10 * 250 which is
2,500 and then then the standard
deviation would be the standard
deviation * root n so 2 * otk 10 for xar
10 we can use these two formulas so the
mean of xar n is just the population
mean which is 250 and then the standard
deviation is the standard deviation idun
n so that would be 2un 10 just a quick
reminder from continuous random
variables that this squar is just for
notation so the standard deviation is
actually this number in the brackets
okay let's do some questions we have the
random variable X which is the duration
of one song on a playlist X has mean 3
minutes and standard deviation 0.5
minutes so part A says what does s16
represent remember that the key word for
s or the sample sum was total so s16
represents the total length of 16 songs
in other words how long would it take to
play 16 songs back to back part B says
find the mean and standard deviation of
s16 let's first find the mean of s16
this is equal to n multiplied by the
population mean so in this case n is 16
because we're taking a sample of 16 and
the population mean is 3 minutes so 16 *
3 which is 48 minutes the standard
deviation of
s16 is the square root of n * the
population standard deviation which isun
16 multiplied 0.5 which is 2 minutes
part C says what does xar 16 represent
so xar 16 is the sample mean for a
sample of 16 16 songs remember that the
key word for sample mean was average so
xar 16 represents the average length of
a song in a sample of 16 Part D says
find the mean and standard deviation for
xar 16 so the mean of xar 16 is just
equal to the mean of X which is 3
minutes and the standard deviation for
xar 16 is the standard deviation of X
over The < TK of n so that is 0.5 /un 16
which is
0.125
minutes all right let's do another
question in this one we have the random
variable X which represents the weight
of a tulip in a flower shop X is
normally distributed with mean 20 and
standard deviation 2 part A says what
does xar 25 and S 25 represent remember
that the key word for xar was average so
xar 25 would be the average weight of a
tulip in a bunch of
25 and the keyw for SN was total so s25
represents the total weight of a bunch
of 25 tulips Part B says find the mean
and standard deviation for s25 we can do
this using the form formulas the mean
for s25 is equal n * the mean of X which
is 25 multiplied the mean of X which is
20 which is 500 the standard deviation
of s25 isun n multiplied the standard
deviation of X so this is 2 * by < TK
25 which is 2 * 5 which is 10 part C
says says find the standard deviation
and mean of xar
25 again we can use the formulas the
mean of xar 25 is just the mean of X so
this is equal to 20 and the standard
deviation of xar 25 is the standard
deviation of x /un n so this is 2 over <
tk25 which is equal to 2 on 5 or 0.4
finally in part D it says what happens
to the standard deviation of xar n as n
increases to answer this let's write
down the formula for the standard
deviation of x n this is equal to the
standard deviation of x overun n so we
can see that as n increases since n is
on the bottom of the fraction this
number should should decrease because
we're dividing by a bigger and bigger
number this property is in general by
the way for All sample means and not
just this particular question but let's
explain why this makes sense using this
example in this case X represents the
weight of one tulip which is sold by a
flower shop so X is normally distributed
with mean 20 and therefore the weights
of some of the Tulips could be like 20
22 23 24 if I found a tulet which had
weight 24 that's two standard deviations
above the mean so while it's not that
likely I wouldn't be too surprised right
now consider xar 25 like we have in this
question this represents the average
weight of a tulip in a sample of 25 so
for this to take a value of 24 we'd have
to pick 25 tulips and all of them would
have to average to a weight of 24 in
other words pretty much all of them
would have to have a weight which is two
standard deviations above the mean now
for one tulip to sit in this value it's
reasonably likely however for all 25
tulips to have an average around this
value it's very very very unlikely so
what this means is as we increase n or
we increase the sample size the values
of xar n become come closer and closer
distributed around the mean or in other
words the standard deviation decreases
so if I had to draw a distribution of X
it may look something like this but then
if I drew xar 25 it may look something
like this notice how they have the same
mean but the standard deviation of xar
25 has been reduced okay next question
in this one we're given a random
variable X which has a probability
distribution here recall that this kind
of looks like the probability
distributions we were dealing with when
we were doing discrete random variables
part A says find the probability
distribution for S2 so remember that S2
represents the sum when we take this
random variable twice we can read this
probability distribution table to see
what it would be if if we took this
variable once if we took it once there's
two values 1 and three and here are
their corresponding probabilities if we
took it twice and added them together we
could get a one and a one which would
make two we could get a one and a three
which would make four we could get a
three and then a one which would also
make four and then we could get a three
and a three which would make six so
therefore there are three possible
values for S2 those are 2 4 and 6 now
let's calculate the probabilities for S2
for S2 to have a value of two we'd have
to get 1 and then 1 again so we can find
this probability by 2 on 5 * 2 on 5 to
get a four we either get a 1 and then a
three or a three and then a 1
so to get a 1 and then a three that
would be 2 5 * 3 5 and then to get a
three and then a 1 that would be 3 on 5
* 2 on 5 which is the same as this so
essentially it's this * 2 right to get a
six we would have to get three and then
three so that's 3 on 5 * 3 on 5 I'm just
going to put each of these values here
into my calculator and see what they
come out at so 2 on 5^ 2 is 4 on 25 2 on
5 * 3 on 5 * 2 is 12 on 25 and 3 on 5^ 2
is 9 on 25 part B says find the mean and
standard deviation for S2 there are two
ways we could go about doing this notice
that we have a distribution table here
for S2 and we can use the formulas to
find the mean and the standard deviation
of this random variable remember that
these were from discrete random
variables another way of doing this
would be to use those formulas to find
the mean and standard deviation of X and
then use the sampling formulas to find
these values because we're doing
sampling let's do it that way so the
first thing we want to do is find the
mean of X that's this variable here
remember that the form formula to do
this for a probability distribution
table was the sum of x i p i which is 1
* 2 on 5 + 3 * 3 on 5 which is 11 on 5
the standard deviation of X is Big
Square t and then the sum of x i^ 2 p i
minus the mean s subbing this in we have
the < TK of 1^ 2 * 2 5 + 3^ 2 * 3 5 and
then we're subtracting the mean squ so -
11 on 5 all 2 putting this into the
calculator gives us a value of < TK4 on
5 so now we found the mean and the
standard deviation of this random
variable we can use the formulas to find
the mean and standard deviation for S2
the mean of s
S2 is n * the mean of X which is 2 * 11
5 which is 22 on 5 the standard
deviation of S2 is square < TK n multili
the standard deviation of X so that's <
tk2 * by < TK4 on 5 and that gives us <
TK 48 on 5 part C says find the standard
deviation and mean for s50 so to do this
we can use the same formulas the mean of
s50 is equal to 50 * the mean of X which
we said before was 11 on 5 that's equal
to 110 and the standard deviation of
s50 isun 50 * by the standard deviation
of X which is < TK4 on 5 which is is
using my calculator approximately equal
to
6.93 finally we need to find the mean
and standard deviation of xar 50 the
mean of xar 50 is just equal to the mean
of X which is 11 on 5 and the standard
deviation of xar 50 is the standard
deviation of X over < tk50 so that is <
TK4 5 overun 50 and again using the
calculator this is approximately equal
to
0.139 okay that's the end of this video
after watching this one you should be
able to do these things interpret the
sample sum SN and Sample mean xar n
remember that the keyw for SN was total
and the keyw for xar n was average
secondly we need to be able to use the
formulas to find the mean and standard
deviation
for each of these and finally this was
that last question which was a bit weird
we need to be able to find the
probability distribution for SN if we're
given the probability distribution of X
these last questions don't come up as
much in tests but we still need to be
able to do them